Hey welcome back so you'll have noticed in
that last video that we nearly got you
all the way there but we didn't renew
the pins so in this video we are going
to talk about a few things we're gonna talk
about a brief reminder of fixed time step
we talk about bounciness and default
materials issues of scale and its effect
on the physics settings and then all of
that to stop rigid bodies passing
through each other, now what I mean well
I know that when I try and instantiate
my pins on the renew cycle they're going to fall straight through the floor and that's a
pain but it's also a blessing in
disguise because I want to use it as an
opportunity to teach you a methodology
for debugging common physics issues. So
that's what it's all about
so let's recap what's going on here we
have a PinSetter and it has an animator
attached to it and in its renew substate
or its reset substate here it has a renew
motion clip and that renew motion clip
does very little, it simply calls a
script called renew pins and of
course renew Pins doesn't yet do
anything because we're going to run out of time in
the last video so let's make it do
something the first thing to do is to go
into scripts; the correct scripts not the
imported scripts here you go and into your
PinSetter and under renew pins we need
to get hold firstly of the pin set so
how do we do that? Well I'm going to
publicly expose a GameObject at the top
of my PinSetter.cs and I'm gonna
call it pin set let's say. Now the moment
you publicly expose something good idea
to save it go to unity find the thing in
question the PinSetter; find a prefab in
question
drag it across cool so the script now
knows what it's going to instantiate it's going to
instantiate this set of pins here but
hang on
not so far soldier before we do that
let's just take a little look in the
scene view; are we sure that these pins
in the scene right now are the same as
this prefab, well I'm not because they're not
blue because they're not blue who said
there's a prefab connection here there
isn't a prefab connection so what do i
do I don't like having data in two places
which is the correct set of pins to use?
well these guys down here
are a little bit out of date if you look
at them they may look fine but are they going to operate
properly? Well I don't know, let's try dragging
them in the scene and they look ok but I
don't trust it anymore I don't trust
this prefab anymore because I've been
making changes to these pins here and the
connections been broken I know that
these pins operate OK so I'm gonna delete
my pin set prefab I'm gonna re-prefab
the pins from this scene because I trust
that set of information. They've gone
blue so now we have a pin prefab
connections so any changes I make
propagate and then I'm gonna re-drag
this newly created pin set
prefab over to the script Alright? So think
about what you're doing with prefabs
especially if you've been busily making
changes to your pins and you're not
connected to your prefab. You want to make
changes in the prefab so that the change
goes this way from down here in the
pre-fab up to the specific instance not
the other way. So there's a simple tip
for you anyway the script has access now
to that pin set so how are we going to
instantiate? I mean it's quite simple we go
instantiate we've done this plenty of
times before in the course pinSet, like
that and then where are we going to instantiate
that pin set well let's check the docs
for instantiate and see how we're gonna do
this when the docs load we'll find a
method called object.instantiate and
here we could either just instantiate it and
capture it or we can instantiate it at
a particular position with a particular
rotation let's use that method signature.
So I'm going to instantiate the pin set at a
new Vector3 which sits where? Well at 0x, 1829
centimetres in y because if we look in
the scene that is where our pin assembly
is and then 0 in z. Actually I've got
that wrong it's 0 in Y and 1829 in z
isn't it exactly the same as the
inspector over here for the pin 00 1829
and of course I need a rotation on the
end of here as well which is a quaternion
which we've still not dug into what a
quaternion means and why we care
and we're not going to for a while
because we just don't need to know what
we do need to know is that quarternion dot
identity means no rotation cool let's
see what happens let's try the renew
cycle. I'll
do a complete test, I'll bowl a ball if I can
get my mouse movement right boom here it
goes
Oh my god that's slow, let's start again now what you
might wanna do is create yourself some
buttons that do some standard launches
for you if you get fed up with firing it.
The disadvantage of that of course is
that by doing lots of non-standard
launches you're creating lots of
different test conditions for the game
so pros and cons anyway
9 pins they settle, they come back cool. We hit
reset, go to the scene view let's watch
what happens we swipe out the way
successfully, fantastic, swiper goes back
up, pins instantiate and straight through the floor.
Oh bugger. Right so how do we debug
something like that? Well there's lots of
things we can consider here
firstly maybe this is happening because
they are instantiating not on the floor
so maybe we go five centimeters off the
floor
maybe they're kind of embedded in the
floor maybe the pins aren't all the same
height or something that's, Oh, look,
there's one so if you have a look down
here you'll see that this pin set has
one that is sitting below the floor maybe
that's causing the problem. You see this one
here which pin number is that offending
pin number six so change it in the
pre-fab look at pin number six in the
pre-fab here it is and you see as a y
value of minus something, naughty so now
in this instance because I've changed a
prefab of course the pins in the scene
have changed so it's all good. Has that fixed the
problem so we've raised the instantiated
object up five centimeters and got rid
of this rogue pin let's have a look and
see what happens now I'm just gonna
reset, I'm not gonna bother bowling the ball here we go. Now remember
your first-person controls by the way, hold
down the right mouse button and use WSAD
anyway, they still fell straight through the
floor so now let's use our trick of
slowing down time let's hit reset and
just at the crucial moment when they
appear I'm gonna hit pause, boom there we
go, and I'm going to zoom in. There you go
Now they are instantiating off the floor.
None of them are touching the floor everything
looks hunky dory we step step step
step step
they start falling down and they go straight through the floor
nasty so hypotheses. Well one would be
that the pins are moving so fast even
though they don't look they're moving
like they're moving fast that they are
passing through this floor collider
because that can happen if you move
more than the distance of the width of
the floor in a frame that they look like
they could have been then maybe it's
passing through the floor so when you're
debugging something like that just go
nuts for a moment make the floor 50
centimeters thick but of course you need
to offset if you can do that by half it's
width. So let's see if that helps for a start.
We've made the collider thicker and
there are other settings I'm going to show you in
a minute that relate to this but let's
just see if we can narrow down what the
fundamental problem is. Is it to do with
collider thickness reset and they still
fall through the floor. Well I would be
tempted to say well maybe that's the
solution but maybe we just don't
have a thick enough floor how about it it was two meters
thick and then offet the mid-point so you
know if you have a hunch that it's
because the collider's not deep enough then
go nuts make it really silly stupid deep
and see what happens let's see what
happens now, Do they still pass through?
Yep they still pass through ok well
maybe it's too narrow why would being
narrow matter? Well who knows but let's just
double the width and see what happens. Maybe the width has got
something to do with it. These are the sorts
of things you're going to want to do when you're
trying to debug this stuff. Still passed
through the floor. OK so at this point it's
like well what the hell's going on so
useful tip coming up
Use a default material. Always have at
least one default material. I want you to go
to your assets folder and create yourself a
new physics material. They call it
physic material because they can't
spell but physic material
like that and we're just gonna call this
default and then I want to make sure
that all of our objects have some sort
of material on them because for example
by default things have no bounciness but
nothing has no bounciness apart from
maybe I dunno jelly or silly putty. No I mean
that doesn't. I don't know what the hell
do you drop it has no bounciness rubbish
Let's give our default material maybe I
don't know let's be indecisive about the
dynamic and static friction halfway nought
point five but definitely let's have some
bounciness. So create a material called
default and give it some bounciness of point one
dynamic and static friction of point 5 let's
say. Great now go into your project
settings / edit and project settings and
down to physics; spelt properly this time
and in there you will have an option for
default material set it to that default
material. Great. That's important that means that any new
thing that you create will have that
default material but I said any new thing
that you create, how about the bowling pins what
material do they have? None so select all
of the bowling pins inside the pre-fab
not from the hierarchy from the prefab
all of them and then go to the material
and set it to the default physics
material and finally do the same with the
floor. Make sure that the floor has the
default physics material. The default
physics material will apply to any new
object you create but it won't apply to
any previous objects. So let's see if
having some bounciness and some physics
material has helped. One of these
solutions eventually will fix it and
then we'll peel back the onion. No, that
didn't help but it is a very useful
thing to know about the physics engine.
So what next? Next thing you can look at
is project settings and time, let's have
a look in there
So you have a fixed time step this is
how rapidly the physics engine computes
the physics that point nought two of a
second; two milliseconds 20 milliseconds
or fifty times a second. So how about if
we made that twice as fast how about if we
computed physics every point nought one or
a hundred times a second let's have a
look and see if that makes any difference
sometimes you need to turn up the
fidelity of your physics calculations as
long as you've got performance to spare
this is fine
hasn't helped but I'm gonna leave it
there I just want to show you this
setting; really important it's how often
physics are calculated. Cool, where else
can we look for the problem well let's
take a look in project settings / physics
now. What have we got, we've got gravity we've made
gravity stronger why because we have
made our scale of our whole world abnormal
the NVIDIA PhysX system underlying all
this assumes that one world unit equals
1 meter whereas we're using one world
unit equals one centimeter so the
effect that can have is it can change
things like your gravity scale required
we've turned up our world scale a
hundred times so gravity should really
be rather than, mine is -9.81 it should
really be more like -981. Let's try
-981. I think nothing's gonna
work properly but let's just try it. The
pins are much more aggressive in the way
they fall and they still fall through
the floor. OK but as we're rescaling I'm
gonna leave my gravity at 981. How about
the bounce threshold what's that all
about? Well go to the Unity docs click on
the little blue thing and see so
two colliding objects with the relative
velocity below this will not bounce well
this was two m/s before and remember that we
have moved to centimeter so try moving
your bounce threshold a hundred times smaller, see if that's
stopping the bounce and the passing
through the floor you see the type of
debugging we're doing here? There're significant
consequences of rescaling your game I
wanted to show you them. That didn't
really help helped a little bit they
paused for a second I think but it
didn't help
ok so what's the sleep then let's have a
look at that while the Unity docs are
a little out of date with Unity 5 but this has
to do with the velocity below
which objects go to sleep well if
they're going to sleep at point
nought, nought five of a meter a second
previously we want them to go to sleep
only if they go a hundred times slower
than that because we're in centimeters
so try that hundred times slower on the
sleep threshold. Let's see if that's done it
were they sleeping? No, didn't do it. OK let's
persist default contact offset what's
that all about well that's actually not
listed in the docs but it is this thing
it's the min penetration
penalty. How deep in meters
in meters not centimeters are two
objects allowed to penetrate before the
collision solver pushes them apart well
they're allowed to penetrate point nought
one of a meter or in our game point one
of a centimeter well that's not very
far how far do we want them to actually
penetrate maybe only point nought nought one
of a centimetre again make it a hundred times
smaller try that. That's the most
hopeful so far that it's going to solve
the problem because it's to do with
object penetration oh they nearly sit on
the floor but they're still not sitting
on the floor so this sort of thing can
happen you can end up completely at your
wits end here trying to work out what
the hell's going on. I've made the collider
bigger, I've checked it's not a trigger. It's got a
material on it I have gone into my pins I've
made sure that they have colliders on
them that the colliders are not triggers so that
the physics works my RigidBodies have
got some mass. They've got no drag, how about a little
bit of drag a bit of non-angular drag
it shouldn't make a difference but
while we're at it remember to check all
of your pins put little bit a drag on
them let's see if that stops it. So the
general methodology is we try
looking through all of our properties
making them sensible as we go and then
seeing which one makes the difference.
No the drag still hasn't made a
difference
OK so could it be something we're doing
in the script could it be that maybe if
we did it this way if we said GameObject
new pins equals instantiate the pin set
like that. Capturing
the newly instantiated pin set as
a... hang on... I just wrote perfectly good code and then deleted it
two seconds
capturing the newly instantiated
pin set as a variable like that and then
said new pins.transform.position +=
or something like that and then
this Vector3. We don't have to do anything
with its rotation so we capture it
and then we move it up, well and across to
1829 let's see how that works if we do
it in two steps I don't see why that
should make a difference particularly
but with script execution order going on
in the background and different fixed time
steps and update Loops it might just
make the difference now where're my pins
where have they ended up they've ended
up at 18:29 they are there but I don't
see them that's very interesting so
there's my pins clone where's that ended
up its just ended up in the wrong position
ok that's fine and that's because when I
i didn't need to offset in the z
actually because the very prefab itself
has an offset built in to it I think so
let's try that. Let's try starting again
resetting and then we're using two separate
lines of code. Nope they're still falling through
the floor. So what do you do when you get
to this stage of exasperation what
other weapons do we have in our arsenal to try
and stop these damn pins from passing
through the floor? So at this stage I'm
going to look back in my physics
settings. I'm going to have a little look
and say okay maybe of overcooked the
gravity let's just make it back to -20 and
leave all other changes in place let's
see what happens now
gravity scale is minus twenty now don't
worry I'm gonna show you all the
settings and recap with you before we
move on once we found something that
works so minus 20 isn't doing its not
coming up with the goods the pins are
still falling to the floor so how about
we say well maybe it's a mathematical
rounding error inside the physics engine
itself? How about if we said let's increase
the solver iteration count to maybe fifty
that means it does 50 iterations before
deciding it's solved a
problem. Does that make a difference? No they
still passed through. So continue to play
with say the default contact offset
move it by a couple of orders of magnitude
at a time and see if that solves your
problem because that's the most likely
thing to be causing the problem here.
This type of collider interaction. No
that's still not happening
ok so maybe we change the sleep threshold
back so sometimes you have to cycle up
and down and look through for these bugs you
can try and reason your way out of it
but if it's a bug in the physics engine
which is to be determined then you're
not gonna reason your way through it
you're just going to have to keep
iterating until you get this right so
still not happening so let's go back to
our script and let's look at dropping
the pins from a greater height so when
we renew the pins instead of coming from
five centimeters let's come from 20
centimetres above the deck see if that
helps
Keep moving, keep trying new things and
that has helped
So from 20 centimetres above the deck the
pins I have enough velocity by the time
they get to the deck to actually trigger
the collision so this sounds like if we
look at the physics settings out of play
mode it sounds like a reasonable
hypothesis here so it's to do with the
sleep threshold potentially of the speed
and it's saying that actually these guys
will go to sleep if they're not moving
fast enough but those settings didn't
seem to solve the problem for us it
seemed in this case we actually needed
to just move them up further well they
land ok so I'm happy with that for now
bearing in mind that we are in future
going to deal with tweaking all of the
physics settings I'm happy with this
solution that we're dropping them from
30 centimetres I think in my case so
that's fine but it is 20 centimetres in
my case is one thing I want to deal with
we don't want this floor this wide, at
least we don't need to appear this wide
so set your back to 105 make it a
sensible depth visually maybe ten
centimetres. OK so that floor looks
kind of reasonable now now let's see
what happens when we reset do we still
have a reasonable behavior or do we have
issues we have issues the pins fall of
the edge so the solution to that is
rather than having the collider directly
on the floor
take the box collider off your floor then add
yourself a new game object child game
object to the floor and call it collider
but without the capitals; add yourself
a box collider, like this, now you've
got a box collider on the floor but you can
now improve its width to say maybe 1.2
or 1.3 times the size maybe even 1.5
like that now this may muck up our
gutter in future but for now we have a
separate floor collider and let's put
the default physics material on it and let's
see what happens now the floor looks ok
but because the actual collider is wider
we should end up with the pins landing on
the floor just fine. They almost do but the
floor collider is not deep enough now and
the floor collider doesn't need to only
be one centimeter or however deep it can
be a lot
lot deeper so why not make it deeper. Now
you've got a choice how you scale this, you can
either scale it here or here I'm gonna
scale it in the transform actually so I'm going to make it a
hundred and fifty. I'm going to make it
1.5 times as wide as the object above
the floor and then I'm just gonna make
the depth say ten times and then the
position
minus 5 so it's offset correctly. It's actually
minus 4.5 I think what you gotta do is
work out where exactly where it needs to
be position so that the depth of the
floor works out... that's fine so get
yourself a box that starts at the top of
the floor and extends down far enough
for the collision to definitely happen
at the speed that the pins are moving
when they hit the floor so that's how
I've got my box set and they land fine
finally we solved the problem so
congratulations if you followed this
through the project settings are used
under physics were here take a look at
the physic settings that's what's
relevant that works for me should work
for you too your challenge now in this
video of course the final thing is that
you need to get your pins renewing
properly no passing through the floor no
exploding outwards and and no other
funny business so use all that you've
learned in this video to get your pins
working now so at least they don't fall
through the floor and I'll see you in
the next video